feat(docs/adr): ADR 004: Coroutine-Based Effect System for Consensus (#931)
informalsystems/malachite: docs/architecture/adr-004-coroutine-effect-system.md

# ADR 004: Coroutine-Based Effect System for Consensus

## Changelog

* 18-03-2025: Initial version

## Status

Accepted

## Context

> The Malachite consensus engine needs to interact with its environment (network, storage, cryptography, application logic) at specific points during execution.

Reviewer: So, the engine here is the state-machine, driver, what?

I thought that the engine included some network implementation etc.

Reviewer 2: I agree. Might be best to say explicitly here "core library for Tendermint".

Traditional approaches to handling these interactions include:

> 1. **Callback-based designs** - Provide callback interfaces that must be implemented by users

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Callback-based designs** - Define callback interfaces, called by the engine. that must be implemented by users
```

> 2. **Trait-based polymorphism** - Define traits that users implement to provide required functionality

Reviewer: Is this Rust-specific?

Author: The _trait_ nomenclature is, but this is also known as interfaces or subclasses in OOP languages or type classes in FP languages.

3. **Message-passing architectures** - Define protocols for communication between consensus and external components

We needed a design that would:
- Maintain a clear separation between the consensus algorithm and its environment

> - Keep the consensus code linear and readable despite external interactions

Reviewer: Linear here is something like "identical to the pseudo-code"?

Author: Kind of, I meant devoid of callbacks or indirections. Like the difference between structuring code as a state machine where the flow of the program is not immediately obvious from reading the code compared to a program that simply calls other functions and act on their return values.

- Support both synchronous and asynchronous operations

> - Facilitate testing by making effects explicit and mockable

Reviewer: Effects not defined yet :D

> - Allow different execution environments (sync/async runtimes, actor systems, etc.)

Reviewer: Is this the same as 

> - Support both synchronous and asynchronous operations

?

Author: No, the terms sync/async are unfortunately a bit overloaded here.

For _effects_:
- Sync: the effect must be performed immediately and the coroutine resumed with a result value
- Async: the effect can be performed in the background, the coroutine resumed without a value, and the result value provided at a later point via an input.

For the execution environment:
- Sync: the environment performs blocking syscalls
- Async: the environment uses an async runtime like Tokio without blocking syscalls

Reviewer: So operations are the latter?

Reviewer 2: clarified in text

- Handle errors gracefully without complicating the consensus core

## Decision

> We've implemented a **coroutine-based effect system** using the `process!` macro that allows the consensus algorithm to yield control when it needs external resources, and resume when those resources are provided.

Reviewer: This would fit which of the enumerated approaches?

Reviewer: Also a link to what `process!` is or does can be helpful, here or in the following.

Reviewer 2: clarified in the text

### Key Components

1. **`Effect` enum**: A type that represents all possible interactions the consensus algorithm might need from its environment.
2. **`Resume` enum**: A type that represents all possible ways to resume the consensus algorithm after handling an effect.
3. **`Resumable` trait**: A trait that connects each effect with its corresponding resume type.

> 4. **`process!` macro**: A macro that handles starting the coroutine, processing an input, yielding effects, and resuming consensus with appropriate values.

Reviewer 2: Might be useful to define Inputs also as a key component. 

Ref @cason also points out in his review that input definition is missing.

### Flow

1. The application calls `process!` with an input, consensus state, metrics, and an effect handler.

> 2. The consensus algorithm runs until it needs something from the environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. The consensus implementation runs until it needs something from the environment.
```

> 3. It yields an `Effect` (like `SignVote` or `GetValue`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. The consensus implementation yields an `Effect` (e.g., `SignVote` or `GetValue`).
```

4. The effect handler performs the requested operation.
5. For synchronous effects (like `SignVote`), the handler immediately resumes the consensus with the result.

> 6. For asynchronous effects (like `GetValue`), the handler resumes consensus immediately, and later provides the result as a new input.

Reviewer: Not sure if we have defined inputs until here.

Reviewer: Must it be asynchronous, or is this optional?

## Consequences

### Positive

1. **Separation of concerns**: The consensus algorithm code remains focused on the state machine logic without environment dependencies.
2. **Code readability**: The consensus code retains a linear, procedural flow despite the need for external interactions.

> 3. **Flexibility**: The same consensus core can work in different execution environments (async runtimes, actor systems, etc.)

Reviewer: Core == algorithm?

4. **Testability**: Effects are explicit and can be easily mocked for testing.
5. **Error handling**: Clear points where environment errors can be handled without complicating the consensus core.

### Negative

1. **Learning curve**: The coroutine-based approach might be unfamiliar to some developers.
2. **Effect handling consistency**: Requires careful documentation and examples to ensure users handle effects correctly.
3. **Complexity with asynchronous effects**: The pattern for handling asynchronous effects like `GetValue` requires additional understanding.

> ## Consequences

Reviewer: This section is duplicated.

5. **Error handling**: Clear points where environment errors can be handled without complicating the consensus core.

### Negative

1. **Learning curve**: The coroutine-based approach might be unfamiliar to some developers.
2. **Debugging complexity**: Debugging code that yields and resumes can be more challenging than fully synchronous code.
3. **Effect handling consistency**: Requires careful documentation and examples to ensure users handle effects correctly.
4. **Complexity with asynchronous effects**: The pattern for handling asynchronous effects like `GetValue` requires additional understanding.

## Implementation Notes

1. The coroutine implementation relies on the `genawaiter` crate, which allows defining functions which can yield values and be resumed later.
2. Each `Effect` variant carries a value that implements `Resumable`, which knows how to create the appropriate `Resume` variant.
3. The `process!` macro handles the boilerplate of creating the coroutine, handling effects, and resuming execution.
4. For asynchronous effects, the consensus must be resumed immediately, and the result must be provided later as a new input.

> 5. Error handling is done at the effect handler level, with fallback behaviors defined to allow consensus to continue even if an operation fails.

Reviewer 2: I'd find it helpful to include concrete code snippets here. 

Or simply point to the "Example" section below.

- Uses a message queue to feed back asynchronous results to the consensus engine

### Main loop

The `main` function establishes:
- A Tokio channel for queueing inputs to be processed by consensus
- A network service for receiving external messages
- The consensus state initialization with application-specific context

The main loop uses `tokio::select!` to concurrently handle two event sources:
1. Incoming network messages (votes, proposals, etc.)
2. Internally queued consensus inputs (like asynchronously produced values)

### Input processing

The `process_input` function serves as the entry point for all consensus inputs, whether from the network or internal queues. It:
- Takes the input and consensus state
- Invokes the `process!` macro to run the consensus algorithm
- Handles any effects yielded by the consensus algorithm using `handle_effect`

### Effect handling

The `handle_effect` function demonstrates handling both synchronous and asynchronous effects:

1. **Synchronous effects** (`SignVote`, `VerifySignature`):
   - Perform the operation immediately
   - Resume consensus with the result directly

2. **Asynchronous effects** (`GetValue`):

>    - Resume consensus immediately with `()` to allow it to continue

Reviewer: What does `()` means exactly? I understand after reading the example.

   - Spawn a background task to perform the longer-running operation
   - Queue the result as a new input to be processed by consensus later

3. **Network communication** (`Publish`):
   - Uses the network service to broadcast messages to peers
   - Waits for the operation to complete using `.await`

```rust
use std::sync::Arc;

use malachitebft_core_types::{Context, SignedVote};
use malachitebft_core_consensus::{
  process, Effect, Input, Resume, State as ConsensusState, Params as ConsensusParams
};

use myapp::{MyContext, Vote};

#[tokio::main]
async fn main() {

>     let (tx_queue, rx_queue) = tokio::mpsc::channel(16);

Reviewer: This is a sender/receiver pair?

Author: yes

    let network_service = NetworkService::new();

    let params = ConsensusParams::new(/* ... */);
    let mut state = ConsensusState::new(MyContext, params);

    tokio::select! {
        network_event = network_service.recv_msg() => {
            match network_event {
                NetworkEvent::Vote(vote) => {
                    process_input(Input::Vote(vote), &mut state, &metrics, &network_service, &tx_queue)
                }
                // ...
            }
        },

        input = rx_queue.recv() => {

>             process_input(input, &mut state, &metrics, &tx_queue)

Reviewer: You are missing the network service here, I am afraid.

        }
    }
}

// Function to process an input for consensus
pub async fn process_input(
   &mut self,
   input: Input<MyContext>,
   state: &mut ConsensusState<MyContext>,
   metrics: &Metrics,
   network_service: &NetworkService,
   input_queue: &Sender<Input<MyContext>>,
) -> Result<(), ConsensusError<MyContext> {
    // Call the process! macro with our external effect handler
    process!(
        input: input,
        state: state,
        metrics: metrics,

>         with: effect => handle_effect(effect, input_queue)

Reviewer: I am afraid you have to pass the `network_service` here as well.

            let is_valid = verify_signature(&msg, &pk);

            Ok(r.resume_with(is_valid))
        },

        Effect::Publish(msg, r) => {
            // Logic to publish a message over the network
            network_service.publish(msg).await;

            Ok(r.resume_with(()))
        },

        Effect::GetValue(height, round, timeout, r) => {
            // Extract the timeout duration
            let timeout_duration = get_timeout_duration(timeout);

            // Spawn a task to build the value asynchronously
            let tx_queue = tx_queue.clone();
            tokio::spawn(async move {
                // Build the value (collecting txs, executing, etc.)
                let value = build_value(height, round, timeout_duration).await;

                // Put the `ProposeValue` consensus input in a queue,
                // for it to be processed by consensus at a later point.
                if let Ok(value) = result {
                    tx_queue.send(Input::ProposeValue(value));
                }
            });

            // Resume consensus immediately
            Ok(r.resume_with(()))
        }

        // Handle other effects...
    }
}
```

> ### Notes

Reviewer 2: I would find it helpful to have a subsection here describing the common-case flow, ie the sequence of inputs/effects reaching to a decision.

4. At that point, the coroutine yields an `Effect` (like `SignVote` or `GetValue`).
5. The effect handler performs the requested operation.
6. For synchronous effects (like `SignVote`), the handler immediately resumes the coroutine with the result.
7. For asynchronous effects (like `GetValue`), the handler immediately resumes the coroutine with a `()` (unit) value,
   and will typically schedule a background task to provide the result later by feeding it as a new input back to consensus via the `process!` macro.

#### Possible effects yielded by an input

Here is a list of all effects that can be yielded when processing an input:

* StartHeight:
  - CancelAllTimeouts
  - ResetTimeouts
  - ScheduleTimeout
  - GetValue
  - Effects for any pending inputs

* Vote
  - WalAppendMessage
  - VerifyVoteExtension
  - GetValidatorSet
  - VerifySignature

* Proposal:
  - WalAppendMessage
  - GetValidatorSet
  - VerifySignature
  - Publish
  - Same as *Vote*

* Propose:
  - RestreamProposal
  - WalAppendMessage
  - GetValidatorSet
  - VerifySignature
  - Publish

* TimeoutElapsed;
  - WalAppendTimeout
  - Decide

* ProposedValue:
  - CancelTimeout

>   - Same as *Vote*

Reviewer: Vote or Proposal?

Author: Vote, as this may trigger a vote which will be fed back to consensus straight away
